# Project 4

![UYNoWork](./images/yunowork.jpeg)

In this lab, you are tasked with taking an existing data structure that
is not thread safe and wrapping it to use in a multi-threaded
environment. In industry you may be tasked with modifying legacy code to
work in a multi-threaded environment so this is a critical skill to
master while in school ðŸ˜ƒ.

You are given an existing implementation of merge sort. This
implementation is derived directly from the book "Introduction to
Algorithms" by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, and Stein. Your job is to wrap
this algorithm so you can use it in a multi-threaded environment.

## Learning Outcomes

- 3 Construct applications that utilize processes, threads, and
    synchronization primitives to solve problems requiring concurrent or
    parallel computation
- 3.2 Explore the effects of multiple threads operating on the same
    buffer

## Dumping deadlocked threads with GDB

When you are working on multi-threaded programs it is pretty easy to get
into a deadlocked scenario. Debugging multi-threaded programs can be
difficult because running your program under the debugger can change the
timing of your code and thus make the issue go away. So sometimes the
only way to see where your program is stuck is to attach a debugger post
mortem and dump out the threads.

So assuming you have a program that you ran and it is currently stuck
somewhere here are the steps to at least see where it is stuck which can
help you fix the issue!

## Get the PID of the process

Before you attach a debugger you want to confirm that your program is
completely stopped and you want to get the pid of the program so you can
attach to it. Open up a second terminal and run the command `ps ux` and
look for your program. If you canâ€™t find your program you can try
`ps aux` which will output all users. If you still cant find it make
sure that your program hasnâ€™t exited. **NOTE:** You can not attach to
another users program unless you have access to the root account, you
can only attach to your programs.

In the example below you can see the program
`./mylab -c 3 -p 8 -i 100 -s 5` with PID **254167** is what we want to
debug.

    [shanepanter@onyx:~]
    $ ps ux
    USER        PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
    shanepa+  46764  0.0  0.0 1178788    0 ?        S     2020   0:00 /bin/bash
    shanepa+ 129368  0.0  0.0 182776  2632 ?        S    10:02   0:01 sshd: shanepanter@pts/32
    shanepa+ 129377  0.0  0.0 127848  3864 pts/32   Ss   10:02   0:02 -bash
    shanepa+ 154093  0.0  0.0 1178792    0 ?        S     2020   0:00 /bin/bash
    shanepa+ 240623  0.0  0.0 1178788    0 ?        S     2020   0:00 /bin/bash
    shanepa+ 254167  0.1  0.0 590304   828 pts/32   Sl+  11:36   0:00 ./mylab -c 3 -p 8 -i 100 -s 5
    shanepa+ 254357  0.0  0.0 182776  2472 ?        S    11:36   0:00 sshd: shanepanter@pts/6
    shanepa+ 254358  0.5  0.0 127716  3536 pts/6    Ss   11:36   0:00 -bash
    shanepa+ 254514  0.0  0.0 166156  2392 pts/6    R+   11:36   0:00 ps ux

## Attach to the process

In the same terminal that you ran the `ps ux` command start gdb and
attach to the process with the PID that you found in step 1. Once you
have attached to the process issue the command `thread apply all bt`
where `bt` stands for backtrace applied to all the current threads.

The example below shows that we have 4 threads. Thread 1 is the main
thread and we can see that it is waiting on a `pthread_join` which is
expected so we donâ€™t need to worry about Thread 1. Thread 2, 3, and 4
are all blocked on a condition variable and we can see in the stack
trace they are all stuck in the `dequeue` function.

    [shanepanter@onyx:~]
    $ gdb
    GNU gdb (GDB) Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.6.1-120.el7
    Copyright (C) 2013 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
    This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
    There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.  Type "show copying"
    and "show warranty" for details.
    This GDB was configured as "x86_64-redhat-linux-gnu".
    For bug reporting instructions, please see:
    <http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/bugs/>.
    (gdb) attach 254167
    Attaching to process 254167
    Reading symbols from /home/ShanePanter/repos/shanep.github.io/os/labs/lab2/_solution/mylab...done.
    Reading symbols from /lib64/libpthread.so.0...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    [New LWP 254178]
    [New LWP 254177]
    [New LWP 254176]
    [Thread debugging using libthread_db enabled]
    Using host libthread_db library "/lib64/libthread_db.so.1".
    Loaded symbols for /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    Reading symbols from /lib64/libc.so.6...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    Loaded symbols for /lib64/libc.so.6
    Reading symbols from /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    Loaded symbols for /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2
    Reading symbols from /lib64/libgcc_s.so.1...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    Loaded symbols for /lib64/libgcc_s.so.1
    0x00007f067f11e017 in pthread_join () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    Missing separate debuginfos, use: debuginfo-install glibc-2.17-317.el7.x86_64 libgcc-4.8.5-44.el7.x86_64
    (gdb) thread apply all bt

    Thread 4 (Thread 0x7f06767fc700 (LWP 254176)):
    #0  0x00007f067f120a35 in pthread_cond_wait@@GLIBC_2.3.2 () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #1  0x00000000004014a0 in dequeue (q=0x2066010) at queue.c:97
    #2  0x0000000000400e55 in consumer (args=0x0) at lab.c:76
    #3  0x00007f067f11cea5 in start_thread () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #4  0x00007f067ee4596d in clone () from /lib64/libc.so.6

    Thread 3 (Thread 0x7f0675ffb700 (LWP 254177)):
    #0  0x00007f067f120a35 in pthread_cond_wait@@GLIBC_2.3.2 () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #1  0x00000000004014a0 in dequeue (q=0x2066010) at queue.c:97
    #2  0x0000000000400e55 in consumer (args=0x0) at lab.c:76
    #3  0x00007f067f11cea5 in start_thread () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #4  0x00007f067ee4596d in clone () from /lib64/libc.so.6

    Thread 2 (Thread 0x7f06757fa700 (LWP 254178)):
    #0  0x00007f067f120a35 in pthread_cond_wait@@GLIBC_2.3.2 () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #1  0x00000000004014a0 in dequeue (q=0x2066010) at queue.c:97
    #2  0x0000000000400e55 in consumer (args=0x0) at lab.c:76
    #3  0x00007f067f11cea5 in start_thread () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #4  0x00007f067ee4596d in clone () from /lib64/libc.so.6

    Thread 1 (Thread 0x7f067f534740 (LWP 254167)):
    #0  0x00007f067f11e017 in pthread_join () from /lib64/libpthread.so.0
    #1  0x0000000000401151 in main (argc=9, argv=0x7fff5b567418) at lab.c:176
    (gdb)

## Debug it

Now that we at least know **where** our process is stuck we can exam the
code and come up with all the ways that this scenario could occur. Be
aware that the issue may not be in the `dequeue` function! More likely
than not the bug is somewhere else entirely. All this does is give you
some insight into where your program is getting stuck **NOT** where the
problem is!

## Task 1 - Make Thread safe

Read through the files `lab.h` and `lab.cpp` shown below to make sure
you understand the algorithm. You are not allowed to modify the single
threaded implementation in you must implement the function
`mergesort_mt`. Your implementation needs to split up the array into
equal chunks and then hand each chunk to a new thread. You will then use
`pthread_join` to wait for all the chucks to be sorted at which point
you will need to merge the results together. You will not need to use
locks for this approach because you are taking a large array and
splitting it up between threads so each thread only operates on its
section of the larger array. C pointers come in really handy for this
approach because you can keep the original array in place and just
declare new pointers into separate chunks of the existing array.

- [pthread tutorial](https://computing.llnl.gov/tutorials/pthreads/)
- [Intro to Threads](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/threads-intro.pdf)
- [Threads API](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/threads-api.pdf)

## Task 2 - Driver app

Once you have completed writing the multi-threaded version of the code
you will need to test your code with a simple command line driver that
will take two command line arguments and output the number of threads
used and the total time to sort the array as shown in the example below.
You should see a speed up when you increase the number of threads used
to sort the array. However, if you add too many threads you will see a
slow down because of the overhead of context switching between threads.
You will need to experiment with the number of threads to see what the
optimal number is for your machine and document that in your
Retrospective.md file.

    usage: ./myprogram <array_size> <num_threads>
    $ ./myprogram 1000 2
    0.0820312 2
    $ ./myprogram 1000 3
    0.104004 3
